Java plugin process (#4239)
ElektraInitiative/libelektra: src/plugins/stdioproc/README.md

- infos = Information about the stdioproc plugin is in keys below
- infos/author = Klemens Böswirth <k.boeswirth+git@gmail.com>
- infos/licence = BSD
- infos/needs =
- infos/provides =
- infos/recommends =
- infos/placements = pregetstorage getstorage procgetstorage postgetstorage presetstorage setstorage
- infos/status = maintained unittest shelltest experimental
- infos/metadata =
- infos/description = one-line description of stdioproc

## Introduction

This plugin spawns a new process with a user-defined executable and delegates all operations to the new process.

## Usage

Set the config key `app` and the arrays `args/#`, `env/#` to the path of an executable, the arguments that shall be passed and the environment variables to be set.

```

> kdb mount test.dump /tests/stdioproc specload 'app=/usr/bin/pluginproc' 'args=#1' 'args/#0=--load-plugin' 'args/#1=myplugin'

Reviewer: Is this ready to review? Is this really specload?

Author: > Is this ready to review?

There aren't any tests which check that running a Java Plugin via `stdioproc` actually works. I've checked it manually and I'm currently working on automatic tests. Also some parts of the docs still need updates. Otherwise this PR should be done.

> Is this really specload?
It is somewhat similar, but
1. serves an entirely different purpose
2. `specload` uses only one-way communication, while `stdioproc` is two-way
3. `specload` only sends a single keyset, `stdioproc` has a more complex protocol

Author: > Is this really specload?

I missed that the line literally says "specload". That's a copy paste error. It's fixed in the next commit.

- infos = Information about the stdioproc plugin is in keys below
- infos/author = Klemens Böswirth <k.boeswirth+git@gmail.com>
- infos/licence = BSD
- infos/needs =
- infos/provides =
- infos/recommends =
- infos/placements = postgetstorage presetstorage
- infos/status = maintained unittest shelltest experimental
- infos/metadata =
- infos/description = one-line description of stdioproc

## Introduction

This plugin spawns a new process with a user-defined executable and delegates all operations to the new process.

## Usage

> Set the config key `app` and the arrays `args/#`, `env/#` to the path of an executable, the arguments that shall be passed and the environment variables to be set.

Reviewer: app? I would say `executable`

```

> kdb mount test.dump /tests/stdioproc stdioproc 'app=/usr/bin/pluginproc' 'args=#1' 'args/#0=--load-plugin' 'args/#1=myplugin'

Reviewer: Do we provide this pluginproc as example?

Author: No, this is a purely hypothetical example. A real world example (Java) can be found below. I didn't want to use the `testapp.sh` as an example, since it doesn't really do what the child process is "supposed to". It only does things that make it convenient for testing.

```

During `elektraStdprocioOpen` the plugin will collect the `args/#` and `env/#` values into two arrays `argv` and `envp`.
It then `fork`s a new process and the child calls `execve` with the path from `app` as well as `argv` and` envp`.
The child process is expected to listen to `stdin` and write to `stdout` according to the protocol described below.

> If communication can be established, the child-process will be kept running until `elektraStdprocioClose`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If communication can be established, the child process will be kept running until `elektraStdprocioClose`.
```

## Protocol

The entire protocol is text-based (apart from binary key values) and request-response-based, and happens over `stdin`/`stdout`.
The parent process sends request to the child process.
The child then processes the request and sends a response back.

To encode keysets and keys we use the format of the `dump` plugin.
It is important to note that the `dump` plugin is instructed to write the full keynames (normally it removes the parent prefix).
There is, however, an exception during initialization, which is described in the appropriate section.

> The child-process may also delegate directly to the `dump` plugin, or re-implement the encoding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The child process may also delegate directly to the `dump` plugin, or reimplement the encoding.
```

The communications protocol used by the plugin has 3 phases:

- Initialization: Initial handshake after first starting the child-process.
- Operation: The main phase, which implements all the operations of an Elektra plugin (open, get, set, close, ...).
- Termination: The plugin is being closed and the parent-process tells the child to shut down.

> **Note:** In the sections below we use the following format to describe messages:
>
> ```
> Parent > Child
>

> > HELLO WORLD

Reviewer: protocol version here?

Author: This is just an example of how the protocol is described within the README. It is not part of the actual protocol.

> [users]
> (user)
> ```
>
> This denotes a message sent from parent to child, containing
>
> - the literal text `HELLO WORLD`
> - followed by a newline
> - followed by a keyset called `users`
> - followed by a newline
> - followed by dynamic text called `user`
>
> The names `users` and `user` don't actually appear in the message.
> They are only used as a reference for the descriptions of the message.
>
> The actual message sent could look like this:
>
> ```
> HELLO WORLD
> kdbOpen 2
> $key string 3 5
> joe
> 12345
> $end
> appleseed
> ```

### Initialization

The parent writes the protocol header to `stdin` of the child.

```
Parent > Child

ELEKTRA_STDIOPROC INIT v1
```

The child must respond with an acknowledgement, followed by a `contract` keyset.

```
Child > Parent

ELEKTRA_STDIOPROC ACK v1
(name)
[contract]
```

Here `(name)` is the module name the child uses.
This will be used to replace `stdioproc` in the contract of the plugin.
The `[contract]` keyset must contain the `infos` keys, which will be used replace the ones at the top of this README and the ones in `stdioproc.c`.
It must also contain `exports/_` keys for every operation that is implemented by the child.

> All keys in `[contract]` should be below `system:/elektra/modules/stdioproc`.

Reviewer: Maybe allow any `system:/elektra/modules/<modulename>`?

Author: IMO this is only an option, if `<modulename>` must match the previously sent `(name)`. This would also create a new source of errors.

The parent will rename these keys appropriately.

A child that implements all operations should include these keys (in addition to the relevant `infos` keys):

```

> system:/elektra/modules/stdioproc/exports/open = 1

Reviewer: Its not a good idea to reuse the same name for something different. What about

```suggestion
system:/elektra/modules/stdioproc/exports/has/open = 1
```

system:/elektra/modules/stdioproc/exports/close = 1
system:/elektra/modules/stdioproc/exports/get = 1
system:/elektra/modules/stdioproc/exports/set = 1
```

After this initial handshake, the child should simply wait for further requests from the parent.

> **Note**: Under normal circumstances this handshake will always be followed by an `open` request immediately.

### Operation

When the parent needs the child to process an operation (open, get, ...), it will send a request like this:

```
Parent > Child

> (opname)

Reviewer: Please be a bit close to normal protocol descriptions, e.g.:

```suggestion
(open|get|set|close)
```

[parent]
[data]
```

Here `(opname)` is one of `open`, `get`, `set` or `close` and describes the operation that shall be performed by the child.
The keyset `[parent]` always consists of a single key, namely the `parentKey` (or `errorKey`) that was passed to the plugin.
Finally, `[data]` is the keyset that was passed to the plugin.
The `[data]` keyset is not present in `open` and `close` operations, since those don't receive a `KeySet` in the C API.
However, in the `open` operation `[data]` is replaced `[config]` which is the `KeySet` returned by `elektraPluginGetConfig` in the C API.
This is needed, because the child process cannot request the config keyset otherwise.

The child should then perform the requested operation and respond with

```
Child > Parent

(result)
[parent]

> [data]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[returned]
```

```

> Here `(result)` is one of `success`, `noupdate` and `error`, which correspond to `ELEKTRA_PLUGIN_STATUS_SUCCESS`, `ELEKTRA_PLUGIN_STATUS_NO_UPDATE` and `ELEKTRA_PLUGIN_STATUS_ERROR` respectively.

Reviewer: Why not send ELEKTRA_PLUGIN_STATUS_SUCCESS and so on?

Author: Why is sending a much longer string any better? We already have a handshake, so the `ELEKTRA_PLUGIN_STATUS_` prefix doesn't serve any purpose here.

If you mean sending the integer values of the constants, then this would just make the protocol less human-readable. It wouldn't actually have any benefit, because you'd still need to decode the string e.g. `1` into the integer value.

The keysets `[parent]` and `[data]` are the modified versions of the one sent by the parent.

### Termination

When the parent no longer needs the child process, it will send a final termination request.

```
Parent > Child

ELEKTRA_STDIOPROC TERMINATE
```

The child process should now exit (and thereby close its ends of the `stdin`/`stdout` pipes).

> > **Note:** Under normal circumstances this only happens, when plugin is being closed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Under normal circumstances this only happens, after the plugin was being closed.
```

Author: No it actually happens **while** the plugin is being closed, i.e. the `close` command is sent in the middle of a `elektraPluginClose` on an instance of `stdioproc`.

### Errors

If an unexpected error occurs on either side of the protocol, the connection should be terminated and the child process shall exit.

## Examples

```sh
# mount the Whitelist Java Plugin via stdioproc

> sudo kdb mount config.file user:/tests/stdioproc dump stdioproc 'app=/usr/bin/java' 'args=#3' 'args/#0=-cp' "args/#1=$BUILD_DIR/src/bindings/jna/plugins/whitelist/build/libs/whitelist-$(kdb --version | sed -nE 's/KDB_VERSION: (.+)/\1/gp')-all.jar" 'args/#2=org.libelektra.stdioproc.StdIoProcApp' 'args/#3=org.libelektra.plugin.WhitelistPlugin'

Reviewer: Can you please write a `mount-java` wrapper that takes the ugliness out of this?

Author: In theory we could do something like

```sh
sudo kdb mount-java config.file user:/tests/stdioproc kdb:dump java:org.libelektra.plugin.WhitelistPlugin 
```

The `java:` and `kdb:` prefixes are to differentiate between `Java` plugins and others. This would also only work for Java plugins that are part of this repo. If you want to use plugins from other JARs, you'd have to define the `CLASSPATH` environment variable accordingly.

However, I don't think this example should be changed at all (adding `mount-java` is still a good idea). This example is not supposed to show how Java plugins are mounted. It is supposed to be an example of how to use `stdioproc`. Therefore, it should not hide the actual `stdioproc` config in some helper script.

Reviewer: @kodebach wrote:
> In theory we could do something like
> 
> sudo kdb mount-java config.file user:/tests/stdioproc kdb:dump java:org.libelektra.plugin.WhitelistPlugin

I think we can assume `kdb:` if no `java:` is given?

> The |java:| and |kdb:| prefixes are to differentiate between |Java| 
> plugins and others. This would also only work for Java plugins that are 
> part of this repo. If you want to use plugins from other JARs, you'd 
> have to define the |CLASSPATH| environment variable accordingly.
> 
> However, I don't think this example should be changed at all (adding 
> |mount-java| is still a good idea). This example is not supposed to show 
> how Java plugins are mounted. It is supposed to be an example of how to 
> use |stdioproc|. Therefore, it should not hide the actual |stdioproc| 
> config in some helper script.

I agree, in the process plugin there should be the full example without any helper scripts. Could you please add/extend a Java-Plugin Tutorial where you describe `mount-java` and also how to set CLASSPATH for out-of-source-tree Java Plugins?

Author: > I think we can assume kdb: if no java: is given?

I don't think there is technical reason why `java:com.example.Foo` couldn't be the name of a plugin written in C. The `.so` file certainly could contain `.` and `:`. But we could make `kdb:` optional. Then we'd have:
- `kdb:java:com.example.Foo` means C plugin named `java:com.example.Foo`
- `java:com.example.Foo` means Java plugin implemented in the class `com.example.Foo`
- `foo` and `kdb:foo` both mean C plugin named `foo`

>  Could you please add/extend a Java-Plugin Tutorial where you describe mount-java and also how to set CLASSPATH for out-of-source-tree Java Plugins?

Will do

# Define whitelist
kdb meta-set user:/tests/stdioproc/key "check/whitelist/#0" ""
kdb meta-set user:/tests/stdioproc/key "check/whitelist/#1" allowed0
kdb meta-set user:/tests/stdioproc/key "check/whitelist/#2" allowed1

# Should be allowed
kdb set user:/tests/stdioproc/key allowed0
#> Set string to "allowed0"

kdb set user:/tests/stdioproc/key allowed1
#> Set string to "allowed1"

# Should cause error
kdb set user:/tests/stdioproc/key not_allowed
# RET: 5
# STDERR:.*Validation Semantic: .*'not_allowed' does not adhere to whitelist.*

# cleanup
sudo kdb umount user:/tests/stdioproc
```

## Limitations

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- The executable must have an absolute path.
```
